---
title: "Jill Levine"
location: "Victoria, BC"
talk: "The Clio Package: Clean and Simple Historical Statistics"
session: "Lightning Talks"
---

At Seshat: Global History Databank, we are interested in the studying how social and political organization of human societies and how civilizations have changed over time. We systematically collect what is currently known through secondary source research to construct of large datasets focusing on a large set of variables including those on governance, religion, infrastructure, agriculture and more. One of our projects, Consequences of Crisis, looks at how different societies from prehistory to the more recent times respond to periods of pressure and crisis—namely whether crisis periods result in major war, minor turbulence, or something in between. I serve as a researcher at Seshat and am working on data collection, cleaning, and analysis for the Consequences of Crisis project. In my work so far, I have found a number of useful open source outside datasets of historical statistics, from population, to military deaths, to gender equality. Some of these outset datasets are extremely messy and some need little or no cleaning before they can be used in analysis. One of the best dataset libraries is from Clio Infra (https://clio-infra.eu/), created by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research in 2010. These data are available as csv downloads, but downloading them individually can get cumbersome. A PhD student named Bas Michelson has created pretty incredible remote package that lets users easily download multiple Clio Infra datasets and filter for specific countries or time periods in a few simple steps. This talk will introduce aspects of the package, and give examples of simple visualizations that could be done with Clio Infra data. This talk is appropriate for R beginners and anyone else who is interested!

__Bio:__ Jill Levine is a Research Assistant and Project Manager at Seshat: Global History Databank, and a recent MA graduate in History from the University of Victoria. She is interested in the collection, cleaning, management, and visualization of historical data. She lives in Victoria, BC with several housemates and several dogs.
